People
Anne Aly, Minister for Early Childhood Education and Minister for Youth; 
Dan Tehan, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship; 
Kamila Shamsie, Author; 
Joe Siracusa, Professor of Political History and International Security; and 
Alastair MacGibbon, CyberCX chief strategy officer and former national cybersecurity advisor





Host: Hello, I'm David Spears and the hitting of your some answers tonight award-winning author, Kamala Shamse, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Dan Tien, Minister for Youth and Early Childhood Education, Anne Arley, who's also a leading capitalism expert. Cybersecurity expert, Alistair McKibben, who's firm CyberCX, been engaged by MediBank as a strategic advisor. And Professor of Political History and International Security, Joe Syracusa, please make them all welcome. Also tonight, we'll Twitter survive under Elon Musk and is it safe to bring home the Australian families of Islamic State fighters from Syria? And remember, you can live stream us around the country on iview and all the socials. Now to get us started tonight, here's a question from Aminat Beshearovic. 

Question: MediBank has decided not to pay a ransom despite hackers threatening and following through on the threat to release highly sensitive customer information, which includes abortion records and history of drug and alcohol abuse. Cybersecurity criminals are often from highly sophisticated, highly profitable networks of transnational criminals and rogue states. On the one hand, paying a ransom may encourage more attacks. On the other, not paying a ransom may result in millions of Australians' private information being released. How does the panel propose that government and businesses manage this dilemma when a cyber security hack has occurred? 

Cybersecurity expert: Firstly, can I say that it's truly tragic what has occurred. I'll echo what the Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Cybersecurity has said. It's a dog act. Shameless people. I've spent 20 years or more dealing with these online criminals. There's no good answer to whether an organisation should pay an extortion threat. And until someone has walked in the shoes of an online victim, as in an organisation that's victimised by these criminals, it's really hard for anyone to judge. MediBank clearly has made a decision not to pay, and that's largely been applauded in the media and by the public. But that's done, I'm sure, and I'm clearly conflicted, as you've said, with a heavy heart. There's no right or wrong answer when these criminals strike. It's a series of least worst decisions, and MediBank has made a decision. It's our job now as a community, frankly, to wrap ourselves around those victim organisations and, more importantly, the victims' millions of people that are affected here, some potentially very significantly. The more we talk about the specifics of what this criminal has released, the more we're actually giving oxygen to that criminal enterprise. Paying is a legitimate option. It's not illegal. But how do you trust a criminal to return or delete information that has already proven they're a criminal that can't be trusted? So I can understand how the decision is made, and I'll stop in a second. I'll just say that now, the more we talk about the specifics of what information they are dumping on the dark web, hard to find, but still exposing information, the more we're putting pressure on the next lot of organisations that will surely be extorted by these criminals. 

Host: It's a really interesting answer, and there's a bit there I want to unpack, and I appreciate that you're a little conflicted. You can't talk too specifically about what's going on at MediBank. You were called in post-event to provide advice to them. But generally, coming back to the question, which is about this conundrum of whether to pay the ransom or not, I think you just said that it is a legitimate option in some cases. So your advice presumably isn't always to not pay the ransom?

Cybersecurity expert: Absolutely not. You want to give organisations the most options kept on the table for as long as possible. So you have to, by the way, engage, and this might sound crazy to the audience. I'd love your feedback. You have to engage with the criminals online and ask them what it is they've got. You need to find out what their intentions are. You need to understand the groups they're affiliated with. Because while it's pretty anarchic online, some groups behave differently to others. So sometimes it's also buying times so organisations can better communicate with their stakeholders, customers, government, their suppliers, people that rely upon them. So it's never an easy decision to suggest a pay. Ransomware threat actors traditionally lock up computers at the same time as having exfiltrated data. And so the concept of paying to unlock a computer system is fundamentally different to the concept of paying to ask the criminal to delete the data. Can I add this? The reason why it's still a viable option is we live in a horrendously permissive threat environment. Criminals come up to the door of your house, all of your houses, and all of our businesses every day. They don't just rattle the door knob to see if the door is locked. They'll break into that door. If that was happening offline, you'd all revolt. You'd say it's unacceptable. But online we accept the fact still today, in 2022, that criminals can come up and victimise us. We've got to be careful not to re-victimize the organisations and the consumers who trusted them to protect their data by, you know, again, forcing them an option of paying or not. 

Host: So, Labour's advice is, don't pay the ransom? Do you accept there may be times where it might be an option? 

Labour: Well, I think the operative word here is criminal, right? And there's no such thing as an honest criminal. So even paying the ransom doesn't necessarily guarantee that the data that they have is going to be released, whether it's on the black market, on the dark web, or elsewhere, that's the first thing. But I think that the other important point to make here is what Alistair says here is that cybercrime is going to get worse and worse and it's going to escalate and there will be new modes of it. And I just want to put it back to Alistair. I know you're talking about the organisations. I think organisations need to start seeing cyber security as part of their core business. And developing cyber safe cultures within their organisations as well. A lot of the time, a cyber breach is from the weakest link in the chain, which is the human link. Someone who has fallen for a phishing scam or some kind of scam within the organisation. And I don't think that there are enough organisations who have paid enough attention to developing cyber secure cultures within their organisation. 

Host: If your advice is never pay the ransom, why don't make it against the law? 

Labour: That's a good question. I don't have an answer to. But I think, you know, at this stage, I think their advice is pretty clear. Don't pay the ransom. 

Host: What is the Liberal government's view on this?

Liberal: Well, in the first instance, you shouldn't pay the ransom because you can't trust the crooks and the problem is, if you pay the ransom, they can then get almost a double ransom because then they can go and monetise the data. And so they actually get double the reward for what you're doing. But you can never say absolutely never. And that's why to make it outright illegal to pay the ransom, I think, would be cutting off your nose to spite yourself. Because there might be a very rare instance where it is the right thing to do. This is one of the great conundrums of course you face if there is a kidnapping in a foreign country. And what do you do in those instances? Now, once again, the formal position is you never pay the ransom. But there might be ways or means that you could get a release of someone and save a life. So that's why you would never say never. But in the first instance, it should be, don't pay the ransom. And I agree with Labour. One of the things all of us have to understand is this threat isn't going away. When I was Australia's first cybersecurity minister, we set about doing was just getting out and publicising the fact to businesses, to individuals and to government that this threat is real. And one of the things we used to say to companies was this has to be a priority around your boardroom. 

Host: When it comes to what's going on right now with MediBank, we know there are millions potentially affected here. And a lot of people are worried about what this is going to mean for them and their data and look, unsure what sort of data is now on the dark web. We've also got some of the audience here who's in that very situation. Tell us about your situation. 

Question: I actually feel like my privacy has been violated. My family is all, we all use MediBank private. I'm not a member anymore because I left when I turned 25, but all of that information is out there. You know, it's my date of birth, my sex, my addresses, all of that stuff. It's out there forever. And of course, I'm worried about it. I'm really concerned unless someone can assure me otherwise. It's out there for good. 

Host: What should people affected be doing? What are sort of the two or three things you'd advise right now? 

Cybersecurity expert: Yeah, again, it's staggering numbers. What this information does at the very least when criminals get their hands on it, is it increases the fidelity or the directness in targeting you. So they'll have updated email addresses, updated telephone numbers, and other things to either convince you that they know who you are. And as a consequence, perhaps con you. A lot of this is about scams similar to the last issue. So there's so much information about us online that's been stolen over time. It goes to a fundamental question for government eventually about how we identify ourselves online, what credentials we use, rather than handing it over time and time and time again, which becomes a burden for businesses, and a loss to you. So be careful of the phone calls you get, be careful of the emails you get, be careful of letters you get in the mail. That's a sad undermining of the very fabric of our society because we rely on trust to do commerce and to deal with each other. So all of this just undermines trust and confidence in our society. 

Author: But it also strikes me, the things you mentioned, date of birth, sex, address. How many websites do we give that out to? And how many of them need it? I mean, if I want to buy, say, a theatre ticket, and I'm going to get it online, they're still asking me for that information. So there's another question I think about what kind of information should people be allowed to ask? 

Cybersecurity expert: And why are you collecting the first place, right? 

Labour: But you don't even have to purchase online. You can go into a store and have to give your email address and a whole range of other data just to buy lipstick. 

Host: We are having a debate in light of these high profile attacks, how long companies have to keep this sort of data for. I mean, would everybody agree that too many companies are keeping too much data for far too long? 

Liberal: Well, it's a good question, and I think this will continue to be raised the more we see incidences like we saw with Optus and MediBank. We've put data retention laws in place mandatory for specific companies. We did that for a reason, which was to keep the community safe. Now, these are the companies which aren't required to keep data but are keeping it. We do need to look at, okay, well, what should be the requirements that they need to protect that data, what levels of data they need to be holding. And then I think one of the things we're going to do, and hopefully we're going to do this in a bipartisan fashion very shortly, is look at what are the fines that we need to be putting in place for companies when breaches do occur. 

Host: Well, there's legislation before the parliament, right? 

Liberal: It's about two million at the moment. We need to make it a lot bigger. There is legislation that was introduced by the Attorney General with the Privacy Act to do just that, to increase the penalties from two million to 50 million. 

Cybersecurity expert: What this will do is put a price on data, which means you can then calculate risk. When organisations invest in cybersecurity and data protection, they try to do it rationally. I'd argue, by the way, the boards today, I talked to a lot of boards around the world, but specifically in Australia and New Zealand, have this as number one on their agenda. They want to know what to do to protect themselves and you. But by putting a price on it, which is a good thing, it means you can make better decisions about investment. So, I applaud the concept of raising the price. We also need to look at what the carrot is to improve security for all of us. 

Question: Based on what we know right now, what's the driving force behind this spike in cyber attacks? Why now, what's new? 

Professor: Well, look, social mobility is a two-edged sword. We were all told it was good and that the new day was coming, and of course, the bad guys can get on the internet, too, and screw you over. In the 1790s and 1800s, the United States paid bribes to pirates, along with Europeans, who didn't have much of a navy to beat them up. And then finally, they beat them up, and that stopped that. So, we have to think of some way to punish the hell out of these people. You know, you've talked about, you do not criminalize pain, and I think you should always have a back channel. Officially, the deal is we don't deal with terrorists and people like that. But I think when you catch somebody, you ought to send them a jail for a long time. We trade people on the internet who steal things, like they were characters in a Walt Disney movie. We think it's funny, it's some 16-year-old kid, or whatever. Maybe some 22-year-old kid hanging around somewhere in some coffee shop in Prague screwing over. We ought to throw the book at these people, and we should make it very clear that we're going to go after them and everybody else. And also, we can become a little more proactive. We could go after them. There isn't anything that they can do to us that we can't do to them. I mean, that's kind of the bad secret around Washington. We can do things, too. But I think also the government has to compensate people who get worked over. I mean, there has to be some kind of a program to help them. But in this age of data, and you're right, you literally have to give your birthday to get a pizza delivered and stuff like that. I think we have to think very carefully about the future landscape and where we're going to be. I mean, if we're just going to give in over and over again, or build it into the price of something, I think we're on the back foot and it's losing proposition. But I think we should be very tough. We should have laws, and we should have Australian kids as they're growing up know that if they indulge in this, they're going to pay a very, very heavy price. 

Host: Just one more in the interest of finding some solutions here. And yes, the penalties are obviously being addressed by the parliament. But there's also been some talk about having a national ID system where your ID is verified, presumably by a government agency, instead of having to give it to all the companies that need your documents, they can just verify it with that agency. What do you think about this? 

Cybersecurity expert: The document verification service exists now. It just needs to be expanded. We need to, so already, banks and others can basically say, I've had this credential shown to me by Dan Tien. They can recognize the photo on the passport that he's handed over and check it on their databases to get a tick. And then no more information needs to be taken. 

Host: So they don't need to hold that data?

Cybersecurity expert: No, theoretically no. And some of the reasons why that data has been held is because not all organisations have access to the document verification service. They need to be expanded. We need to ask about the credentials that we issue people, because that's pretty easy to copy most of this stuff. I've been in houses where criminals have had lots of identities that all legitimately issued by states, because that's what criminals do. So we're going to get smarter about the identity. 

Host: So would this basically resolve the issue where you wouldn't need companies like MediBank and Optus and so on holding all this data. They just check you are, who you say you are.

Cybersecurity expert: But to provide a service to you, organisations will still have to collect something, right? I mean, data is an important part of business. The question is, have you collected too much data? You know, that's not necessary to your point. Why do you need to give an email address to get a receipt in a business these days? It's just shocking. 

Labour: I don't like it. They don't need my email address. 

Cybersecurity expert: No, but it's all part of them building up databases because they've seen data as free. Can I go back to the question about why these criminals exist? They primarily operate out of safe havens, failed states or states that don't care about the West. 

Liberal: There's another point, though, which I think is a really important one. And that is we have to have greater offensive capability, even where they're in safe havens to go after them. And there was a $9.9 billion investment, Red Spice, which, once again, the government is going to build on to make sure we do have that capability to go after them. We've got to make sure that we do pursue them. You've got to make sure we've got the capability to do it. 

Host: Let me just come back to you, because you actually work in financial crime prevention from your expertise in this. How well protected are we, really? 

Question: I would say because Fintech is a relatively new industry compared to all the banking industry, so we are actually easier to be targeted by the criminals. So I would say we have a lot to do in this space. And I think the number one thing that's preventing us from being better at fighting financial crime is all of the things we're doing today are reactive. So attacks happen. We react to it. We build rules to attack them. But the problem is that we will never be fast enough. We will never be faster, like compared to the frosters. So I was wondering what can we do to be more proactive. So one thing we're trying to do in the industry is to leverage machine learning to build a customer profile for the customer's normal behaviors. And then if something suspicious happened, we can detect it earlier and then we can block it and so that we can protect the customers. But I would say we're still not there yet. We have a lot to do. 

Labour: Your question about why now, really baffled me, because it's not just now, this is actually something that's been going on for a while. It has increased. Yes, absolutely. But that's what criminals do. They innovate and they are opportunistic. And wherever they see an opportunity and a vulnerability, that's where they'll go and that's where they'll head. So the idea of being more proactive and not so reactive, as you mentioned, I think it's a really important point there to stress. 

Host: OK, I want to move on because there's plenty to get to tonight. Our next question from Melissa Kellechivig. 

Question: Elon Musk wants to create an internet where the most privileged people in society can punch down at marginalized groups. Queer people, people of color, women and gender minorities in the Jewish community, without facing any consequences. In one of his first tweets as owner, he stated, comedy is now legal on Twitter. But the real comedy, in my opinion, is that after people started making parody accounts in personating Elon, he banned them. What is the panel's position on Elon's policy changes on e-safety, and how should Australia and Australians respond? 

Author: You know, I think we pay a lot of attention to what Elon Musk is doing because he's telling us things all the time. He'll tell us something one day in the next day he'll change his mind again. I'm far more concerned about the people who aren't telling us what they think. I mean, what Elon Musk has compared in terms of numbers, Twitter has what, 350 million? Facebook has near 3 billion? Is that an OK space? And we get so focused on the individual, and we know about this one individual, so we think about what he's going to do, rather than thinking about the platforms and how they're working. Facebook is not a benign space. None of these are benign spaces, and none of them are existing for our good. I think what's going to happen with Twitter is he's going to try a lot of different things and see how people respond, see how his advertisers respond. And I think we're going to see, right now, there are a lot of people saying, oh, I'm going to leave. I'm about to leave. And this is going to be like all those Americans who said, if George Bush wins the election, I'm going to Canada. If George Bush wins the next election, I'm going to Canada. If Trump wins, I'm going to Canada. And all the Canadians are saying they're saying, well, where are you? The fact is, we go on these social media platforms, we find things we enjoy, and we get comfortable. It goes back to the previous conversation. We get much too comfortable with, well, I just use it this way. I don't have to pay attention to that. There's all this other stuff going on. And I think we need to really step back and think about, we sort of landed into the world of the online world. I mean, I was at university when it was this great Wild West. And I don't think we have yet had the conversations with ourselves enough about what we are doing in terms of the very concept of privacy, which absolutely does not exist in the way it did. 

Host: You're on Twitter? 

Author: I'm on Twitter. 

Host: Sounds like you're going to stay on Twitter? 

Author: I'm on Twitter. I'm on Facebook. I'm on Instagram. And I lie to myself all the time about them. I can be sitting in Sydney and having great conversations with many Pakistanis about the World Cup semi-final. And that feels great. And there's a sense of community. And you're getting information fast. And you really like the feeling of getting information fast and knowing what people are seeing. And you enter this sort of siloed off world where, even though you're aware all this other stuff is going on, you are living. And I'm including myself in that. You're living in the siloed off world. I know what's being said about Muslims and migrants and other people. And it's nothing new. This isn't starting with Elon Musk. You think this has been a pleasant world on Twitter for all for marginalized communities until now? 

Professor: I don't like Elon Musk. I think he's a fruitcake. He plays us from day one. He knew he wanted to become a US citizen, but he knew that coming from South Africa was going to be harder. So he became Canadian citizen first, and then he worked his way into America. You cannot, and this is the guy before him too, and all the others. You can't put someone in charge of a network that allows hundreds of millions of people to say, or not say what they want to say, and you're in charge of moderating, or what goes forward, what goes back. The day that Donald Trump lost the 2020 election, he had 88 million followers on Twitter. And he only had 74 million votes that day. He had more Twitter followers than he had votes. Now, I've been to Europe a number of times to see security conferences, and some very serious people used to wake up every morning and look at Brexit and Twitter to see what they're going to do for the rest of the day. I mean, people are able to control people with these kinds of things. The idea that we have these huge public spaces that are really unregulated by government, this is the Wild West, these places. And I think we've gotta do more of that. 

Cybersecurity expert: Well, it's not really unregulated. Twitter and all of those other social media platforms have become a really important communications tool for all of us. They've gone beyond those companies now. You know, Twitter is the world's newsroom. It's the online newsroom, whether we like it or not. Australia moved the first legislation in the world to start pushing our values, our norms, onto our part of that internet. As is right and proper, doesn't mean you have to agree with everything on there. The unwinding of those staff in Twitter by Elon Musk and the sacking of staff or the announcement by Meta today that are getting rid of thousands of people... The people that are actually there doing the horrendous job of sifting through the sewerage of the internet, trying to keep us marginally safe. The last thing I'd say is this, these social media platforms become the vehicle for disinformation and misinformation, which pick at the very fabric of our society at democracy, and we've seen the effect it's had. January 6th, the riots at the Capitol, that was largely driven online. And until you realise that free speech doesn't mean the ability to harm people, you have a contra-view, that's fine. 

Labour: I just want to bring in here the issue of youth and the content, because maybe we do choose what we watch, but a lot of people don't. And that's because of the algorithms. And in fact, I want to look at, just mention some research that was done by Reset Australia, which showed that 41% of 16 and 17-year-olds were exposed to content that was, that underlines the incel discourse and that could lead, according to Reset, that could lead to a violent act. And in fact, if the Reset Research shows that some of these young people are getting this content, more often than they're having Sunday dinners, right? And this is through the algorithms. This is something that should worry everybody, that young people, and they're getting younger and younger, through the algorithms that are set, through these social media platforms, are viewing and are being exposed to disinformation, misinformation, yes. But white supremacist content, from home-grown, home-grown domestic white supremacist content, antisemitic content, far-right content, and incel content. And particularly, young white men are being exposed to this content. 

Host: And you're talking what sort of age again? 

Labour: This was 16, 17-year-olds. Now, that doesn't mean that everyone who sees this content is going to automatically be radicalised. No, the radicalisation process is much more complex than that. But what we do know about why people leave extremist movements behind is because they get exposed to something that plants a seed of doubt and makes them question their beliefs. Now, if the algorithms keep feeding you and feeding you and feeding you the same content, you're never going to get that. You're never going to get that exposure to the things that challenge that content. 

Liberal: Twitter's a gutter. It's a gutter, so my advice would be, if you don't like it, get out of it. 

Host: And are you still on it? 

Liberal: I am still on it. 

LAUGHTER APPLAUSE

Liberal: I am. But, hear me out. I'm on it because, you know what I use it for? There are people in that gutter who have a crack at me the whole time in the most vile way, right? And they do it to Lee Sales. And Lee Sales has said it's the extreme left that doesn't to her, right? What I do is I poke the bear every now and again. You've got to admit what it is. But seriously, when it comes to Twitter, it is a gutter. And if you don't like it, I would say to everyone, get off it. It's not only radicalisation, the stuff and Twitter, this is something that the E-Safety Commission has written to them about, the child pornography, the abhorent material. It's illegal. 

Host: You know, sometimes there's helpful information that can be found here as well. Communities, the form and all that. 

Cybersecurity expert: It is a vehicle that gets misused, but still legitimate, it needs to be protected. 

Question: Was keeping the women and children in Syrian refugee camp both a poor and unusual punishment and something Australia should be ashamed of? Or is bringing them home again, making us unsafe? 

Host: Australia's not the only country trying to deal with this difficult situation. What do you think? 

Author: It's a complicated situation. And partly it's complicated by the fact that it's hard to know what people were doing when they were there. You cannot assume that everyone who went was involved in something horrific. And you can't assume that everyone, certainly you know everyone who went, was not. And it's very hard without the information gathering. But there is something quite horrendous about this idea of we will make people stateless or we will abrogate our responsibility to our citizens and say, just stay in that hellhole. So no one has to deal with you. Every nation has to have a way of dealing with its criminals. It is a criminal act, the going in, for most places, has been a criminal act. There has to be a way of dealing with it. There has to be a way of looking at individual cases and deciding, are you still a threat? Are you not? In the case of children, it is disgraceful that there are children who are born and have lived years now, or Australian citizens or British citizens or whatever they are. That their governments have said, you just stay in the hellhole. You are a child of this nation, but you're not really. And we'd actually be more comfortable just taking your citizenship away and saying, we have nothing to do with you. You've got to take responsibilities. 

Host: Well, come back to the politicians on this. But Joe Syracuse, I'm interested in your take on this as well, because the US, too, has been dealing with this.

Professor: Right. Well, I have a very large view of human nature. If these people, the adults, abjure the violent lifestyle and the people that brought them over there, and they want to return to Australia, we should have a big enough heart to take them back. I mean, Australia actually started as a penal colony, as I recall, and everybody had a second chance. So they deserve a second chance, too. But this idea of offering an amnesty to people who were trying to kill yesterday, I grew up with the Vietnam War and the Civil War and all that. You have to provide an amnesty and give them a chance to become useful citizens. But this idea of turning people stateless, it's not only inhumane. It actually says more about us than them. It tells us the world what kind of people we are, and I don't think Australians are like that at all. 

APPLAUSE 

Host: The Coalition in Government repatriated a group of the children of ISIS fighters, including one who was 17 and another who was 18, so technically an adult. Why was it OK for you to do it? When now you're arguing Labour shouldn't be? 

Liberal: They were orphans who were repatriated, and as I understand it, were repatriated based on the national security advice that we were given at the time. And so we were very firmly were able to say that this was about making sure first that Australians are kept safe, which is the number one priority of any government is to keep your citizens safe. And then, obviously, there was the assessments that was made and the guidance that was given. What we are not seeing from the current government is any sort of transparency around what they're doing and the decisions that they're making. The first we heard about any of this was on the front page of a major Australian newspaper. So that was the first instance that anyone heard about it. And then, the next, we heard that they would be settled in Western Sydney and settled amongst the refugees who had fled from ISIS to seek refuge here. I mean, the transparency amongst orphans coming back versus women who went to Syria knowing that it was illegal to do so, that they broke the law doing what they did. We had put national security laws in place on a bipartisan basis, which said these were declared areas, and if you went there, you were breaking the law. And not only that, there would be dire consequences in doing it. 

Labour: You're absolutely right in pointing out that when the opposition was in government, they did bring back orphans and a group of young people. And, as you rightly mentioned, some of them were adults. And there was no transparency around that. And if you want evidence of the fact that there's no transparency around that, the person who was in government at the time can't even tell you where they've been settled here back here in Australia. So lack of transparency. Secondly, I find it incredibly disappointing because we have always had a bipartisan approach to national security. We take national security very seriously and that we would not have brought anyone back who had not been security cleared and that all of this has been done in very close consultation with the national security agencies. Thirdly, yes, we do have a responsibility because every other country has taken back, has taken back or is grappling with this issue. And at least have done something and taken back. Most of them have. Most Western countries have. Fourthly, I want to really address this point about this trope about the ISIS brides. Because, if you ever met or heard the story of how some of them got there, they did not go willingly. Many were children when they went there, 15, 16-year-olds. Many went there because they were duped into going there. But regardless of how they got there or where they went there, if they are currently being assessed by our national security agencies as not being a threat, then they should be allowed back, number one, with facing all of the consequences that they will be facing for breaking the law as they have. But let me tell you something about radicalization. It doesn't happen in a vacuum. It happens in an environment which is conducive to radicalization. You leave them there, they will become radicalised. And the next theatre of Jihad, they will be the fighters on the front line for the next theatre of Jihad and be more of a security risk. 

Host: Let me just come back, though, to the concern that's not just from the opposition, but some of the community leaders in Western Sydney and particularly communities that fled ISIS in Syria, how much consultation was there with them because they are pretty upset. 

Labour: Look, I absolutely understand that they're upset. But a lot of that is very much because no doubt, no question. I don't think anybody ever is arguing that ISIS was a brutal and disgusting regime and what happened to the Yazidi people and to the minorities in Iraq and Syria is absolutely heartbreaking. And we are happy to have those people resettled here in Australia. Absolutely yes. 

Host: No, but do they deserve some assurance or comfort that there is monitoring going on? 

Labour: There is monitoring going on. They do deserve that. And there is monitoring going on. We have some of the best security agencies in the world. We do. And they are not going to compromise the safety and the security of the Australian people. And I think that's really important to talk positively about our agencies. I know you believe and you have faith in our AFP and our all our security agencies, to talk positively about those security agencies, to let people know that their safety is first and foremost on the minds of our government and of our security agencies and that they have been assessed. The risk has been assessed. They will be monitored. That risk will continually be assessed. And that Australians will be kept safe as a priority for everything government. 

Liberal: So, Dai Le, the local member of parliament, has written to the home affairs minister on behalf of 20 community organisations in Western Sydney, asking the series of questions and wanting to meet with her. Surely that, if the minister did that, that would be a good thing. Because those 20 community groups who represent the Assyrians have real concern. 

Labour: And they deserve to be, for their hearts to be at rest. I agree with that. 

Host: OK, let's move on from that. Plenty to get to tonight. Next question from Mark Dixon. 

Question: So, the United States consideres itself to be the bastion of democracy. And yet, the primary instigator of the January 6 attack on the Capitol Building continues to deny losing the election and well may be re-elected to office in 2024. Do you see a future for true democracy in the United States? And what will it take to establish a cohesive society? 

Professor: Look, democracy in America is a work in progress. It's been going on since the 1760s. And we've had a lot of strange people involved in the process. Who've excluded a lot of other people? And America has done very well with immigrants and we've got all kinds of minority groups in government. When you get up to Donald Trump, for example, nothing can really explain what he was doing. Television host to wound up as president of the United States. Now, he was elected by people who'd given up on Washington. He didn't have a movement. The movement found him. He was gonna go to Washington, give Washington the middle finger, and have a good time at all the rest of it. And so, he's the major threat now because he's kind of unloosed all the fruit cakes in the hills of America. And all the strange people are now coming down from the hills and getting involved. They all went to the people's house on January 6th to tell the people's government that they're very unhappy with them, which by the way, Thomas Jefferson might have been amused by the whole thing as a matter of fact. Amused by the protest because Jefferson said that the tree of liberty has to be nourished every 20 years by the blood of tyrants and patriots. He wouldn't see a problem there. You know, I grew up in the 60s, in the 60s, cities burned. People died all over the place. The anti-war, the anti-everything movement. I mean, today when I look at these movements, I think, well, it's kind of a pale thing of what was going on in the 60s. Now, my point is this. I think America will come through. It won't be recognizable. But my beef is, and finally here. America's in this position. Australia may even be in this position one day and half a Europe in Asia, too, because I believe that the political and cultural elites have let people down over the last 20 years. These are the people who didn't explain globalization though they enjoyed the hell out of it. These are people who knew things were going. These are the people who tell us we got to take the lead in climate change and don't do a damn thing about it. These are the people who take the lead and everything. I think half the world, because of the, you know, the deferance we've had for the elites, I think they've left this leaderless and I think they're incompetent, you know, and this is why when I get near a university, I say you want to start pumping money into the university that young people have to figure this problem out because Australia doesn't have forever. The history of Australia is not carved in stone. We're going to wind up one day as a little patch on a wall in the British museum if we're not real careful. If we're not real careful. But the point is is that I think there's a lot of reasons for the things that are happening. But what drives me nuts for the past 40 years is how the elites have gone from these people you trust during the Cold War, they did a great job. And in the last 20 years, not such a great job and we don't trust these anymore. And I can just prove my point by saying that is there one person in Australia who can go on television or radio and explain to somebody, explain to the nation in a crisis or settle people down or explain what's going on around the world. I mean, 40 years ago, you had lots of people who could do that, but today I don't see that. Anyway, I think we've been let down up and down the board. 

Host: Coming back to Mark's question about the fate of democracy, I suppose, in the US, Kamala, what do you think? Particularly in light of yesterday's midterm elections where the Republicans made modest gains, but not the red wave that many had predicted. And there's now a bit of a question mark over the prospects of Donald Trump running as a presidential candidate again. What do you think when you look at the United States and the future of its democracy? 

Author: I'm worried about democracies everywhere. You know, I grew up in Pakistan under military rule. I was 15 years old when democracy arrived in the form of a 35-year-old woman, Benazir Bhutto, and to be young and to feel democracy come alive, it was such an extraordinary event. And I remember feeling everyone else is so unlucky because they aren't here in this moment. And now I sort of feel like, I feel as though I saw democracy being born in one country. And now I'm seeing it in infirmity around the globe. It does feel scary. It feels you're right as though people don't trust their politicians anymore. I think the Iraq war was a major part of that. The sense of we were lied to, we protested against it, and then there were just lies told about weapons of mass destruction and in order for this to go ahead. I'm also, I think, we don't talk enough about the role of money in government donations. If you look at, if we're going back to America, one of Joe Biden's great successes was seen as what came to be known as sort of the climate bill, the most significant climate legislation to happen in America. But it was held up in the Senate because it couldn't get through till Joe Manchin signed off in it. We know it is a fact that he is the largest recipient of donations from the energy sector. And until he said, and until the rest of the Democrat Party agreed to the re-wording of certain things that gave them concessions, that building, how is this democracy? How on earth is this democracy if someone who is being paid by the energy sector, a huge amount of money in donations, is able to hold up the most significant climate legislation America's ever known. 

APPLAUSE 

Host: Just to pick up on the democratic will of the people who expressed in those elections yesterday our time in the midterms, one of the striking features was the role of women voters after the Roe v. Wade decision in the United States overturning the abortion law. We also saw women play a very influential role in the Australian election, Anne Ali, surfing out the Morrison government, a lot of independents elected, Labour as well. Are women playing a more influential role in elections?

Labour: I think women have always played an infrared role in elections. I mean simply by the fact that we're 50, more than 50% of the population, right? But I think that women's issues were more front and centre of elections and are becoming more front and centre of elections. Particularly, you know, in Australia, at the last election, there were certainly issues. Many of them were brought to light through the issues that happened within Parliament House and the treatment of women in Parliament House. But also we had the great, the women's march, and we were all told that we should be grateful that we weren't shot with bullets. And so, you know, I think, I think women have always played a part a political role. But women's issues are now at the fore, and I think that's a bloody good thing.


Liberal: Good for you, Anne. Well, as someone whose mother was a member of Parliament, I think women have always played a significant role. But I think we're starting to see in representation the expanding that role. And I think that's a very good thing. I mean, my mother was my political mentor. She was outstanding, did a fantastic job as a member of Government. They came into power when the state was completely bankrupt on its knees, and were able to turn it around in no time. And she had the very difficult job of transforming the health system here in Victoria. And did, and did a remarkable job at it. And, you know, one of the things I think this Victorian State Government needs now is my mother back running the health ministry. But look, let's see more women and let's make sure that they're a part of it.

Host: Because we've got you here, Joe. Let me just come back to US politics. Very briefly, Donald Trump. Does he run? 

Professor: Yes, sir. He's going to... It's going to be a rematch with Joe Biden. Joe Biden runs as well. And we're going to have the 45th president, the 46th president. Go for it in 2024 to see who becomes the 47th president. 

Host: All right. Well, we'll see if that turns out. Let's get to our final question for the evening. It comes from Rose Levy. 

Question: I'd like to first acknowledge our First Nations peoples, particularly the Kulin Nation peoples here in Melbourne. And I'd like to ask Camilla and Ann, I'd like to thank you for your dignified, empowering leadership roles. And I'd like to ask, are Muslim women finally being valued in our societies and workplaces. 

Author: Not a lot. No. No. I mean, you'll have cases of individual attainment and success. But if you're looking at larger scale, I think there's still rampant Islamophobia all over the place. And in the case of women that often express itself in thinking they need to be saved, they must be victims of something. They need to be saved from something. I would like to say, I mean, again, I can't talk about Australia. I can talk about Britain. I don't see much change happening. You know, there are men who are, and again, you'll see more Muslim men being visible. And it's sort of interesting when they're politicians, how they sort of do a little dance step of, no, no, I'm not really Muslim. In the case of Sahaja Javed, when he was home secretary, he was very clear about not being Muslim until the Tory party was accused of Islamophobia, at which point he said, how can my party be Islamophobic? I'm Muslim. And as long as you have people who are having to do this sort of dance of, no, I'm not except when it's useful to you. I can't think of, I mean, there are Muslim women MPs. Some of them are fantastic. But again, those are individual cases. It is not a society wide. That change is really not happening. 

Labour: I think that, you know, when I think about this, I tend to think more towards the future and how incumbent it is on me that not only do I hold the gate open, but I actually smash the gate down and break down the walls and take the bullets and make the path for those who come after me and after me and after me. And I think that's where I like to think about it. Yes, I agree. There are still so many challenges. And no, and you know, if you look at Iran, for example, and what's happening in Iran and the struggle that they are having in Iran because they are using a piece of clothing that is a significant, religious significance to Islam using it as a political tool of oppression for women in Iran. You know, globally, I don't think the lot from Muslim women has changed much at all. And, you know, I agree with Camilla that there are individual women and I'm very privileged to be one of those women. And so I take very, very, very seriously the responsibility that I have, a heavy weight on my shoulders to make sure that I may be the first but I won't be the last. And that those who come after me have shoulders to stand on and a door and a gate and a wall that's been broken down so that they can be the next and the next and the next and the next. 

Cybersecurity expert: If I could just narrow it to my profession, only 21% of the people in cybersecurity in Australia identify as women. And I'm sure it's a much smaller percentage of Muslim women. This is an existential threat. We need all kinds of people, all kinds of past and views to help fight. So the more diverse, the more equal we are, the more chance we have.

Liberal: Anne's absolutely right, this is not something which she alone should carry the burden of. All of us need to. And we are doing really good work in this country. So there is really good work going on. So Anne does have support right across the board, whether it's from males, females or anyone else. 

Host: And even political opponents, yes, as well. Please thank our panel, Kamila Shamsie, Dan Tehan, Anne Aly, Alastair MacGibbon and Joe Siracusa. And thanks to those of you here and at home as well. From driving the conversation, next week, Stan Grant will be back live in Sydney with plenty to discuss, including the anticipated meeting between Anthony Albanese and Xi Jinping. 